when is a cafe a restaurant and a
restaurant
a bar and does it differ in edinburgh
cardiff
belfast or london well thank you martin
i've been looking at the regulation so
let's take cafe for example
so you can sit down and eat in a cafe in
edinburgh
but only between 6 a.m and 6 p.m
they close at 10 p.m in london and in
cardiff
and they're shut all together in belfast
um mark do you want to kick us off with
this
yes sure i mean the first thing to say
is that this virus transmits
in indoor spaces more easily than it
does in the outside
and the second thing is that going back
to the last question the reason the
numbers aren't going down is because
we're on average making too many social
contacts
and so that we know that lockdown works
because when this pandemic started
with tight restrictions it did come
under control
and restaurants cafes it depends
actually how people are seated it
depends how people behave
it depends whether they're inside or
outside and i think that the
you when you read through and i read
through before coming all this all the
different restrictions i looked at
northern ireland i looked at scotland i
looked at whales i looked at
in it is very confusing and it is
different the bottom line is that we
need to reduce our social contacts
and until we get it down similar to the
levels that we started with this is not
going to come under control
and frankly we do need to get on top of
the second wave
and urgency does matter um and so we
just got to get on with it
and it i don't think it's helpful having
lots of different um
hard to understand rules so as a
scientist just help us understand does
it make sense then
scientifically that the rules are
different in these different areas
well i mean the first thing to say is
that there is not a perfect science that
says
you can't you know there isn't a science
that says what a restaurant is or a cafe
and nor is there a you know specific
science that says six people
or five people or seven people um what
has to happen is that our social
distancing has got to be maintained
and of course we're all in this together
i mean everyone has a responsibility
here
but the rules have got to be clear and i
think the argument for a circuit breaker
is that it is
it is tough but it is relatively short
and as we had heard earlier
you know if we could buy months time if
we can get the numbers down
then we've got to get testing and
tracing on top of it rather than chasing
behind at the moment although the
numbers
available test has gone up dramatically
it's still chasing demand
and we're only going to decrease the
demand if we actually get on top of it
and then we can really focus on outbreak
control
on testing in environments where the
risk is higher on testing in the health
system
that's what we have to do and so your
advice would be to to shut them all
together for
for a brief period or for a period of
whatever length
i for a brief period of time we've
really got to get this under control
there's no no question about them
jim thanks for joining us can the panel
please explain to me following on from
martin's question how the government is
going to
expect employers in the hospitality
sector like pubs and wine bars to be
able to pay
their employees wages of 20 and their
businesses are closed and there's
actually no money coming in it just
doesn't add up
graham you had your hand up yeah thank
you for your night again i think is it
the
the level of differences across the four
nations that's adding to the confusion
is it the case that actually it's a rule
for some but not for me because i'll
just pretend i'm in cardiff for the
the purposes of this meeting that i'm
having or the lunch that i'm having as
well
i think it's just too difficult for
people to interpret the rules
that it's too easy for them to interpret
it for themselves
so i think looking at the sage advice
and making the local lockdown
um nationwide it has to be the way
forward colin
thanks fiona i think there's a point
being
missed by a lot of the panel that mark
only just mentioned
at the end of his point that um
the lockdowns is supposed to be uh time
to
break the chain of infection and give
time to
bring up the testing and tracing system
to a suitable level so that that takes
over and
brings down the levels and why are we
not hearing enough about that
okay um miriam
i mean this is so two-part question from
martin and also
our audience has thrown in their intent
as well
when is a cafe a restaurant restaurant
bar because also that affects whether
they can open
or not uh and also the fact that it is
different
in the four nations do you think it
should be one message as we've heard
there
i mean just now i think well firstly
there obviously has been confusion about
what constitutes as a cafe in a bar
and we've seen that replicated elsewhere
in the uk as well i mean we were hearing
we were hearing uh robert jennings in
the in the uk government cabinet saying
that
because if you're going to eat food in a
restaurant
or in a cafe in uh in the uk in certain
parts of the uk now
or in the pub rather that they have to
serve a substantial meal
which could he was asked could it be a
pasty so we could be a pastor if it had
a side salad
or if it had chips i mean if we're
dealing with that level of complexity
it's very hard to navigate
yeah and i understand that in terms of
whether we would have
uh nationwide in the sense of a uk wide
lockdown
um the practicalities of that i think
would be very difficult now for all four
nations because we've
all gone in different directions and
whether i think what we need to do just
now is listen to the public health
advice and follow whatever it is that
we're asked to do there i think that's
first and foremost an issue i think on
the point on hospitality
there's a point that's being overlooked
here as well which is the hospitality
and i say this as somebody who works in
the industry
for a long time is um an area that is
very very insecure at the best of times
for workers
um and it is um you know we have seen
kind of
a lot of zero hour contracts a lot of
precarious employment in the hospitality
sector already
and actually with this pandemic as with
so much of it what it is served to do is
not only create
new vulnerabilities but expose fractures
in our economy that already existed
the furlough scheme was mentioned there
and i want to touch upon that
what we have in replacement for the
furlough scheme is much better
than the cliff edge that they were
looking to do it is still deeply
inadequate it only covers
um area parts it only covers areas that
are in lockdown
and we're still asking people in many
circumstances to make a significant cut
to their um to their wages now are they
getting cuts off their rent are they
getting cuts off their bills are they
getting cuts off their food
no what i would like to see is a roll
out of the initial furlough initiative
and that covers not only areas in
um areas in lockdown but also other
areas so that we can cover areas like
the performing arts and the creative
sector
that actually are going to remain
relatively close for the foreseeable
future
on the point and this is my last point
on hospitality here when we emerge out
of this crisis we need to see a new deal
for workers
because this has exposed vulnerabilities
existed for far too long in our economy
we need to ban zero hour contracts we
need to root out precarious work
and we need a real living wage for all
workers throughout the uk
so doug sorry okay i was just going to
come to douglas but
if you want to jump in sorry yeah i'm
going to
begin with the same point again there's
a huge
big challenging problem out there and
frankly
we're talking about not unimportant
issues but not primary issues
i mean i think there's a brick there's a
breakthrough appeared with the
three-tier approach i mean clearly the
country is being affected in different
ways
um and it's absolutely right in some
parts the country should be subject to
different
rules and regulations another so the
three tier approaches is a good approach
and should be
definitely should be pursued with great
care
taken as to what the lockdown issues are
and how they might be applied in terms
of hospitality
i've got three sons two of which are
very heavily involved in pubs and
restaurants and
and bars so clearly follow that quite
carefully one thing you must remember
young there's a huge number of young
people employed
and and one of the biggest concerns i
have is we're going to finish up with a
lot of young people unemployed
so i really hope we can do something
significant with hospitality and try and
prevent what could be
very significant unemployment in in that
area douglas i mean hearing
what what miranda had to say and in fact
what ian's had to say in in terms of
young people's young people's
unemployment and and the furlough
falling off a cliff
do you think boris johnson should be
doing more so it's not falling off a
cliff and i think that was
actually miriam's point you know what we
have now is first of all the furlough
scheme
well it's significantly reduced in terms
of the money people are going to get but
when it was introduced
it has protected 9.6 million jobs across
the united kingdom 40 billion pounds of
taxpayers money has been invested
protecting these jobs 13.5 billion
pounds
and going to the self-employed with
about 5 million claims
this has been a significant and one of
the most generous schemes
anywhere in the world but then you've
got you've got you've got greater
manchester you've got the americas in
open revolt i mean surely this is not
good for boris johnson because clearly
he wants to bring in some kind of extra
restrictions there and he's got a fight
on his head but now the replacement
scheme
is actually very similar if you look at
the levels of support
that individuals and employers have to
put in in france in spain in germany is
very similar to the two-thirds
that the government are paying in the
united kingdom compared to other
countries
but ian is absolutely right because
young people
are effectively the ones that could
potentially be the most affected by this
first of all their education so many of
them didn't get to finish their
school education they didn't get to sit
exams they went on to
college and university and in scotland
and in other parts of the united kingdom
they had a terrible initial experience
at university
and now they are going to be paying for
this for much of their lives and the job
market
when we get through this health pandemic
the global
response to the economic emergency that
we're all going to face is one that we
have to treat extremely seriously so i
think it is really young people we've
got to be thinking about and that's why
the uk government have introduced the
kickstart scheme
and many other schemes to help young
people into employment but
again as the chancellor has said and the
prime minister has said it's going to be
impossible to save
every single job but we are putting in
place the tools to hopefully protect as
many of them as possible
as we've done with the furlough scheme
and the replacement scheme going forward
simula malhotra i was
very surprised to hear that
the the job support scheme was talked
about by douglas there
as being the same as the furlough scheme
or almost the flame
even louise st louise casey has come out
today saying that
if you're going to say that you're going
to pay two-thirds of someone's salary
then you should also be saying that
they'll only be able to afford
two-thirds of their rent
or pay for two-thirds of the food for
their family
we've got a system that is currently and
decisions being made by the prime
minister
and the chancellor that are pushing
people into destitution and
the most important thing we need to do
right now is look at how we
both deal with the health crisis that
we're facing
as well as the economic crisis the job
support scheme
i've had many employers tell me that it
is not going to incentivize them
to keep on employees especially as times
get tough again and many in the aviation
industry
as well who are suffering from the
slowdown
and that's because when the government
talked about this scheme
as trying to keep people on part-time
actually
it's more expensive to keep people on
two people on part-time than it is to
keep one person on full-time
and rather than this they should be
looking the government should be looking
at what's been done in germany and
elsewhere and what the labour party has
been saying to have
a proper short hours scheme that
supports people to stay on work
in work and in their jobs part-time
because the cost of long-term
unemployment
is much greater than
what we're going to otherwise have to
pay to keep people
in their jobs in viable jobs that will
be there when we come through this next
period
and i just want to come back to this
first question as well when we're
talking about
how have we done boris johnson versus
nicholas sturgeon
let's be clear we've had some of the
worst
excess death rates in the world
neither has done as well as they needed
to for our country
and as of and nora as as other countries
have done and now we're headed for the
worst financial recession economic
recession
in in certainly in europe and i think we
have to ask questions about what's going
wrong and we have to ask those questions
honestly the government has to ask those
questions
honestly and that's why it's important
that they continue
to work with the opposition to listen to
your position we do need a four nation
approach
and we do need to take the job losses
that are there now
and could be coming with a million
facing a cliff edge
at the end of october much more
seriously than the government's doing
now
grant thanks fiona uh if we're looking
for money
um why don't we use a radical suggestion
along the lines of janus ferrofakis
ferrofaccus
last week the billions of pounds that
have been given to uh
management consultants instead of giving
it to them why don't we give it to
local leaders like andy burnham for his
local test and trace regime
let's give it to hospitality workers and
let's give it to all the theatre and
entertainment workers who so desperately
need it and have been failed
yvonne hi like
like many people i'm really surprised
that when rishi sunak made this
announcement back
in march to support his put his arms
around everybody and support us
that this would suddenly stop which
feels like it's about to happen
um because if we were at war we'd have a
war chase
that would be continuing you wouldn't
give up after seven months or whatever
and i feel like the government is like
went into the first year went into one
gear
and i've taught the shift lead into
another one now and
it looks really bleak for a lot of
people in lots of different sectors of
different economies different areas and
different parts of the country
hamza all right so to add to siema's
point about the job
safety scheme um rishi sunak also said
that universal credit is there as a
safety net for those whose minimum wage
income has dropped but um he's also
proposed cuts universal credit so this
is going to
cost the six million households a
thousand pounds a year
with the bottom fifth losing seven
percent of their disposable income
um i think this is just terrible
economics because it's um
he's taking six billion pounds out of
the economy by cutting benefits that's
over six billion
less cash being spent in a
consumer-driven economy so these are
reducing incomes for the households
actually have to spend the money
but as usual the poor are paying the
cost of it
kate we've we've ranged quite far and
wide in this in this particular debate
i'm just going to bring you back to the
original question
asked by martin when is a cafe a
restaurant a restaurant bar and also
been a lot of talk about that here in
scotland in terms of
what cafes can operate uh given that
restaurants are shut
off from a takeaway does it differ in
edinburgh cardiff belfast or london do
you think there should be
one rule across the united kingdom so no
for two reasons
but i also think that we want to take a
four nations approach as much as
possible so
a clarity of messaging is critically
important when dealing with this virus
however the simpler the message often
the harsher
it is so if you look at scotland for
example i represent
the highlands where which has a
different rate of infection than some
parts
of a the central belt now we've taken
action to have
stricter restrictions in some parts of
the central belt than we do in the
highlands
because it does lead to greater
compliance people can understand what's
going on
and there's clearly higher rates there
now that will mean a slight variation in
what those restrictions are
the second point though as to why we
need different restrictions is because
we're managing multiple harms now i
don't
have in the scottish government the
fiscal levers
have asked for them multiple times i
don't have the fiscal levers
or the financial resources because we're
not allowed to borrow
to properly compensate employers now
we're coming as you said
to the to what is a cliff edge because
there's no way around it the job support
scheme
is not a replacement for the the
furlough scheme it disincentivizes
employers
we know from our own analysis that it's
going to cost tens of
thousands of scottish jobs which will be
exacerbated right across
the united kingdom and ultimately
employers need support
as jim said earlier hospitality has been
through the most challenging of times
businesses up and down the country have
made enormous sacrifices have invested
but right now with less resources
and the prospect of a cliff edge with
furlough coming to an end
they're having to make very difficult
choices and for me the message to the uk
government is that
if there's going to be these
restrictions as we manage the health
harms as well as the covet harms
and with our primary objective right now
of suppressing the virus
because actually suppressing the virus
is the fastest way
of getting back to some form of
normality economically
or socially if we can suppress the virus
then we can
then we can restart but when it comes to
financial support
you know douglas mentioned a short while
ago about business support
in this break period that we've got two
week period
one of the challenges was waiting for
the chancellor to make an announcement
last friday
on what they were going to do in terms
of additional financial support that's
right
because it's one of our primary sources
for the scottish government it's our
primary source
of funding that is the primary means by
which we have to compensate
and mitigate the effects now we largely
work together quite
cooperatively but i think it's ludicrous
that just as we're seeing the rate of
infection
increase and the likelihood of
restrictions
greater restrictions we're seeing the
end of what has been a lifeline and i
accept
i've been open and honest that it has
been a lifeline for many businesses
now is not the time to end it everybody
can see it
every business the length of breadth of
the country can see it but the
chancellor can't appear to see it no
matter how many times
it's put to him but kate and fairness
you and labour party welcomed
when the chancellor announced the
replacement furlough you both welcomed
it at the time and you said it was right
that there was a replacement there was
no cliff edge
but to say you were waiting for the
chancellor to outline any further
support you could give the chancellor
has now said scotland will get
700 million pounds more and i was
thankful for it so why then today
did nicolas sturgeon announce it would
still just be 40 million pounds going to
the businesses that are affected
40 million pounds that won't be
available until do you appreciate that
that's for somebody
it's for health and it's not just for
businesses or it's not
it's not just support it's for the 3000
pound grants that the uk government are
given to businesses in england
that you could give to businesses in
scotland they are waiting right now
they've had to wait 10 days sorry if i
can just finish because this is really
important to the businesses that are
watching this because i spoke to them
on monday i had a virtual uh summit with
businesses
and they are crying out for help and
they're crying out for help now so give
them that 700 million pounds
you've got from the chancellor or give
them something that's not understandable
that's based on an absurd position well
give them something 250 million pounds
that you haven't spent
but that's based on the accuracy fund
why not spend hang on if you both talk
at the same time no one can hear let's
let kate answer that's it
you've made your vote that's okay to
answer the two points i would make is
one
small grants of one and a half thousand
pounds is no replacement for the
furlough scheme that's point number one
point number two is that 700 million
pounds worth asking the chancellor
that does not just cover business
support that's for health
that's for transport and a whole host of
other things so just for clarity
the third point is that the business
support we've put in place is more
generous than the uk government support
it is and the facts are there at the
moment in a
rest of the uk if you're obliged by law
to close you'll get a grant
but all the businesses in the supply
chain won't get funding and other
businesses that are not directly
impacted won't get funding in scotland
we've provided funding
for the businesses required to close by
law but also the businesses in the
supply chain
and the businesses that might see
reduced trading but aren't required to
close by law
and i think that's the breadth of
support that we need to see but let's
not kid ourselves
one and a half thousand pounds of grant
as important as it is
is no replacement for the furlough
[Music]
scheme
you